NumPy is the fundamental package for
numeric computing with Python.
It provides powerful ways to
create store and manipulate data,
which makes it able to seamlessly and
speedily integrate with a wide
variety of databases and data formats.
This is also the foundation that Pandas
is built on which is a high performance
data-centric package that we're going
to learn more about in this course.
In this lecture, we're going to talk about
creating arrays with certain data types,
manipulating arrays ,selecting
elements from arrays and
loading data sets into arrays.
Such functions are useful for
manipulating data and
understanding the functionalities of
other common python data packages.
So, you'll recall that we import
a library using the import keyword and
numpy's common abbreviation is np.
So let's import numpy as np and
import math.
Right, arrays are displayed as a list or
lists of lists and
can be created through lists as well.
When creating an array, we pass into it
a list as an argument in a numpy array.
So, a equals np.array and I'm just
going to create a list here, 1, 2,
3 and we'll print out what a looks like.
And we can print out the number of
dimensions of a list using this ndim
attribute, so, print[a.ndim].
If we pass in a list of
lists into a numpy array,
we create a multi-dimensional array,
for instance a matrix.
So, here I'll say b equals mp.array and
I'm going to create a list and
inside of it I'll pass two other lists.
So, 1, 2, 3 is the first list and 4, 5,
6 is the second list and let's look at b.
So, we can print out the length of each
dimension by calling the shape attribute,
which returns a tuple, so, b.shape.
And we can also check the type of
items in the array, so, a.dtype.
Now, beside integers,
floats are also accepted in numpy array,
so, c equals mp.array and we can just
put in some floating point numbers here,
2.2, maybe 5, maybe 1.1 and
let's do c.dtype.name.
All right, so
let's look at the data in our array.
So c, note that numpy automatically
converts integers like
five up to floats since
there's no loss of precision.
Numpy will try and give you the best data
type format possible to keep your data
types homogeneous, which means that
they're all the same in the array.
Sometimes we know the shape of
an array that we want to create, but
not what we want to be in it.
Numpy offers several functions,
to create arrays with initial
placeholders such as zeros or ones.
Let's create two arrays, both the same
shape, but with different filler values.
So, I'm going to say d equals np.zeros and
I'll give it a shape of (2,3) and
we'll print d.
And then e equals np.ones and
we'll give it the same shape (2,3) and
print e and there we can see our arrays.
We can also generate an array
with random numbers.
So, np.random.rand and
we give it a shape, (2,3).
You'll see zeros, ones and rand used
quite often to create example arrays,
especially in stack overflow posts and
other discussion forums.
We can also create a sequence of numbers
in an array with the arrange function.
The first argument is
the starting bound and
the second argument is
the ending bound and
the third argument is the difference
between each consecutive number.
So, let's create an array of every even
number from 10 inclusive to 50, exclusive.
So, f equals np.arrange, we're going to
start at 10, we're going to end at 50.
Remember this is exclusive and we're going
to jump by twos and let's look at f.
If we want to generate a sequence of
floats, we use something called linspace.
In this function, the third argument isn't
the difference between two numbers, but
it's the total number of items
that you want to generate.
So you want to watch out for that,
so, np.linspace( 0, 2, 15 ] and
what this really means is we want 15
numbers from 0, inclusive to 2, inclusive.
So, we can do many things on arrays, such
as mathematical manipulation, addition,
subtraction, square, exponents, as well as
Boolean arrays, which are binary values.
And we can also do matrix manipulations,
such as product transpose, inverse and
so forth.
So, let's see some of these, arithmetic
operators on arrays apply elementwise.
So let's create a couple of arrays,
I'll create a is np.array.
I'll just pass in a list 10,
20, 30, 40 and then b,
we'll do np.array[1, 2, 3,
4] now let's look at a minus b.
So c is equal to a minus b and let's look
at a times b, so d equals a times b.
So, with arithmetic manipulation
we can convert current data
to the way we want it to be.
So here's a real world
problem that I faced.
I moved down to the United States
about six years ago from Canada.
In Canada, we use Celsius for
temperatures and
my wife still hasn't converted to
the US system, which uses Fahrenheit.
With numpy I could easily convert
a number of Fahrenheit values, say,
the weather forecast to Celsius for her.
So, let's create an array of typical
Ann Arbor winter Fahrenheit values.
So, fahrenheit equals np.array and
sometimes it'll be zero degrees
Fahrenheit, may be minus
10 minus 5 minus 15 or 0.
These are not a typical
Ann Arbor winter values.
And the formula for conversion is the
temperature in fahrenheit minus 32 times 5
over 9, and
this gives you the temperature in celsius.
So, we'll just say
celsius equals fahrenheit
minus 31 times 5 over 9 and
let's look at Celsius.
Okay, great, so, now she knows it's
a little chilly outside this week, but
it's not so bad.
Another useful and important
manipulation is the Boolean array.
We can apply an operator on an array and
a Boolean array will be returned for
any element in the original with true
being emitted if it meets the condition.
For instance, if we want to get a Boolean
array to check the Celsius degrees that
are greater than minus 20 degrees, we will
just say Celsius is greater than minus 20.
And there's our Boolean array,
True, False, False, False and True.
Here's another example,
we could use the modulus operator to check
numbers in array to see if they're even,
so, celsius mod 2 equals 0.
Beside elementwise manipulation,
it's important to know that numpy
supports matrix manipulation.
Let's look at the matrix product,
if we wanted to do elementwise product,
we use the asterisk sign.
So A equals np.array,
we'll create an array here and
B equals np.array, and we'll create it.
And let's print out
the product of A times B.
If we want to do the matrix product,
we're going to use the @ sign
instead of the asterisk.
So the asterisks is for elementwise and
this is really important.
Actually, the asterisks is for
element wise and
you can think of just the default is
elementwise comparisons or modifications.
But the @ sign is going to use
the dot product, so we'll print A@B.
So, you don't have to worry about complex
matrix operations for this course.
But it's important to know that numpy is
the underpinning of scientific computing
libraries of Python.
And that is capable of doing
both element wise operations, so
the asterisks as well as matrix
level operations, so the @ sign.
And there's more on this
in subsequent courses.
So a few more linear algebra
concepts are worth layering in here.
You might recall that the product of
two matrices is only plausible when
the inner dimensions of
the two matrices are the same.
The dimensions refer to the number
of elements, both horizontal and
vertical in the rendered matrices
that you've been seeing here.
So, we can use numpy to quickly
see the shape of the matrix.
So, a.shape, for instance,
will give us this one a two by two matrix.
When manipulating arrays of different
types, the type of the resulting array
will correspond to the more
general of the two types.
And this is called upcasting and
you saw an example of that before, but
let's see another one.
So, let's create an array of integers,
so, array1 equals np.array,
we'll do 1, 2, 3 and 4, 5, 6 and
let's print out its data type to make
sure that it's actually integers.
Now, let's create an array of floats,
so, array2 equals np.array 7.1,
8.2, 9.1 and then we'll give
a second list 10.4, 11.2 and 12.3.
And let's print out its data type.
So, integers,
int are whole numbers only and floating,
point numbers float, can have a whole
number portion and a decimal portion.
The 64 in this example refers to the
number of bits that the operating system
is reserving to represent the number
which determines the size or
the precision of the numbers
that can be represented.
So, let's do addition for the two arrays,
so, array3 is equal to array1
plus array2 and we'll print array3 and
then we'll print array3 dtype.
So, notice how the items in the resulting
arrays have been upcast into
floating point numbers.
Now, numpy arrays also have an interesting
aggregation functions on them,
such as sum, max, min and mean.
So, we can print out array3 sum,
array3 max, array3 min and
let's try array3 mean.
For two dimensional arrays, we could do
the same thing for each row or column.
So, let's create an array with 15
elements ranging from 1 to 15,
with the dimension of 3 by 5.
So b equals np.arrang 1,16,
and 1 and
we're going to reshape this immediately
to 3 by 5 and let's print b.
Now, we often think about two dimensional
arrays being made up of rows and columns.
But you can also think of these arrays as
just giant ordered lists of numbers and
the shape of the array.
The number of rows and columns is
just an abstraction that we have for
a particular purpose.
Actually, this is exactly how basic images
are stored in computer environments.
So, let's take a look at an example and
see how numpy comes into play
in something like images.
For this demonstration, I'm going to
use the Python Imaging Library, PIL and
a function to display images
in the Jupyter notebook.
So, from PIL, import image and
from IPython.display, import display.
And let's just look at the image
that I'm going to talk about.
So, I'm just going to open this image
called Chris.tiff and display this image.
Now, we could convert this
PIL image to a numpy array.
So, array equals np.array and
we just pass in the PIL image and
we're going to print array.shape and
then let's look at array.
So, we see the shape is 200 by 200 and
then we see the values are all uint8.
The uint means that they're
unsigned integer, so,
there's no negative numbers and
the 8 means 8 bits per byte.
This means that each value
can be up to two by two by,
well 2 to the 8, 256th in size.
But it's actually only 255,
because we start at zero, right,
that's computer science.
For black and white images, black is
stored at zero and white is stored is 255.
So, if we just wanted
to invert this image,
we can just use the numpy array to do so.
Okay, so,
let's create an array the same shape.
So I'm going to create a mask,
I'll call it an np.full and
array.shape, so,
I want it the same as our existing array.
But I want it to be full of 255 valued
uints, let's take a look at mask.
Okay, so, this is like zeros or
ones, but full
basically let's set the value
that you want everywhere.
Now, let's subtract that
from the modified array.
So, we'll create a modified array,
we'll take our main array and
we'll subtract the mask from it.
Remember this is going to
do elementwise subtraction.
So, all of the values in an array,
let's say, first values, 100 minus mask,
255 means that we'll be left
with negative 155 in that cell.
And we're going to do that for
all cells in the array and
let's just convert all of the negative
values to positive values.
So, modified array is equal to
modified array times negative one.
So, it's going to take that negative one
and do, again, elementwise multiplication.
So, negative one times the first cell,
negative one times the second cell and
so forth.
And as a last step, let's tell numpy to
set the value of the data type correctly.
So, we're going to say modified array
is equal to modified array.astype.
So this is going to tell numpy,
you should really trust us.
We know what the data type is in here and
we're going to say,
np.uint8 and let's look at modified array.
All right, so,
that looks maybe as we expect.
Lastly, let's display this new array.
So, we can do this using the from array
function in the Python Imaging Library to
convert the numpy array into
an object that Jupyter can render.
So, display
Image.fromarray(modified_array),
cool, okay.
Remember how I started talking about how
this could just be thought of as a giant
array of bytes and
its shape was an abstraction?
Well, we could just decide to reshape
the array and still try and render.
PIL is interpreting
the individual rows as lines, so,
we can change the number of lines and
columns if we want to.
So, what do you think
that would look like?
Well, let's take a look.
So, we'll create something new
reshaped equals np.reshape and
we're going to take our modified array.
So, this is just our array from above,
before we've done the inversion and
we're going to reshape it to 100 by 400.
Now remember it was 200 by 200.
So, we're changing both the width and
the height here, but
we're keeping the total
number of cells the same.
And let's print out, just to convince
ourselves that we've actually changed it,
the reshaped shape and
then let's display it in line.
All right, so, I can't say I find that
particularly flattering by reshaping
the array to be only 100 rows high but
400 columns.
We've essentially doubled the image
by taking every other line and
stacking them out in width.
And this makes the image look
more stretched out too and
maybe adds a little bit of weight to me.
So, this is an image manipulation course,
but the point was to show you
that these numpy arrays are really
just abstractions on top of data.
And that data has an underlying format,
in this case uint8.
But further, we can build abstractions
on top of that, such as computer code
which renders a bite as either black or
white which has meaning to people.
And in some ways,
this whole degree is all data and
the abstractions that we can
build on top of that data.
From Individual bite representations,
through the complex neural networks of
functions or interactive visualizations.
Your role as a data scientist is
to understand what the data means,
it's context in a collection and
to transform it into a different
representation to be used for
sense-making.
Okay, let's get back to
the mechanics of numpy.
So, indexing, slicing and
iterating are extremely important for
data manipulation and analysis.
Because these techniques allow us to
select data based on conditions and
copy or update the data.
So, first we're going to
look at integer indexing,
a one-dimensional array works
in similar ways to a list.
To get an element in a one-dimensional
array, we just use an offset index.
So, we'll create some array,
bunch of elements and
then we'll say a sub 2 and
we get the value 5 out.
For multidimensional arrays,
we need to use integer array indexing.
So, let's create a new
multi-dimensional array.
So, we'll create this one two by three and
let's look at a.
If we want to select one certain element,
we can do so by entering the index,
which is comprised of two integers.
The first being the row and the second
being the column, so, a sub 1 comma 1,
remember in Python,
we're starting at zero.
All right, so there is the value of 4,
if we want to get multiple elements, for
example, one four and six and
put them into a one-dimensional array,
we can enter the indices
directly into the array function.
So, we can create some new
array np.array and in that,
we're going to pass it a list.
And from that list,
we're actually taking our other array and
plucking out the values
that we're interested in.
We can also do that using
another form of array indexing,
which essentially zips the first list and
the second list up.
So, we can take a and
we can actually pass it to lists and
it will zip these values up for us.
And so we get the one, four and six.
Boolean indexing allows us to select
arbitrary elements based on conditions.
For example,
in the matrix that we just talked about,
we want to find elements
that are greater than five.
So, we set up a condition,
a greater than five.
So, let's just print,
what is a greater than five?
This returns a Boolean array showing
the values in the corresponding index
that are greater than five.
And so, here we get a bunch of Falses and
a bunch of Trues.
So, we can then place this array
of Boolean values like a mask
over the original array to return a
one-dimensional array relating to the true
values.
So, if we do a sub a greater than five,
what's happening here is we'll take
the greater than five operator,
we'll broadcast that.
So, we'll compare that across all of the
elements of a, creating a new matrix and
then we'll apply that as a mask over
the outer a and emit the results.
So as we can see, this functionality
is essential in the Pandas tool kit,
which is the bulk of this course,
so, we'll be using this a lot.
So, slicing is a way to create a sub
array based on the original array.
For one-dimensional array slicing
works in similar ways to a list.
To slice, we use the colon, for instance,
if we want to put : 3 in
the indexing brackets, we get the elements
from index 0 to index 3.
So, remember, excluding index 3.
So, we'll create some array,
just numbers 0 through 5.
So, that's six numbers and
then we'll print a sub :3.
And so, we just get the first
few elements, the first three.
By putting 2 : 4 in the brackets,
though,
we could get elements from
index 2 to index 4.
So, again, excluding index 4, so
print a sub 2 : 4, instead of just
giving us the length, now that will
actually give us just those indexes.
For multi-dimensional arrays,
it works similarly, Let's see an example,
so a equals np.array and
we're going to create a new list.
And in here we're going to
put three lists and so,
let's take a look at this and we see that
we've got three rows and four columns.
So, first,
if we put one argument in the array, for
example a sub : 2, then we get
all of the elements from the first,
the zeroth and the second row, the oneth.
If we add another argument to the array,
for example a :2 comma,
so, second argument 1 : 3 ,
we're going to get the first two rows.
But then the second and
third column values only.
So, let's give that a try, a, so
we want all of the first two rows and
then we want 1 : 3.
So, in multi-dimensional arrays,
the first argument is for
selecting rows and the second
argument is for selecting columns.
It's important to realize that a slice of
an array is a view into the same data.
This is really important,
this is called passing by reference.
So, modifying the sub array will
consequently modify the original array
as well.
Here I'll change the element at
position (0,0) which is 2 to 50.
Then we can see that the value in the
original array is changed to 50 as well.
So I'm going to create a sub array and
I'm going to just use what we use before.
So a sub colon two, so grab a couple
of rows and then 1 : 3.
So, grab a couple of columns and
I'll print out the value of the sub-array,
sub 0,0 and
then I'm going to set that to 50.
I'm going to change it to 50 and
then we'll print out what
the subarray thinks it is.
So, that should be 50, but
then we're actually going to
print our original array,
so that's a as well.
And remember a here is 0 comma 1,
because we've
changed which columns that we've
taken out for our sub array.
So, when we took our sub array and
we did 1 : 3,
we got rid of the 0th column in a.
So, zero column in sub array is
the first or the one column in a.
Okay, now that we've learned
the essentials of numpy,
by let's use it on a couple of datasets.
So, here we have a very popular
data set on wine quality.
And we're going to only look at red wines,
the data fields include
fixed acidity volatile acids,
residual sugars, chlorides and so forth.
The important one here is
the alcohol content and
the quality, that's how I buy wine anyway.
To load a dataset into numpy,
we can use the genfrom text function.
We can specify data file name,
the delimiter which is optional but
we often use it and the number of
rows to skip if we have a header row.
It's one here, so, the genfrom text
function has a parameter called d-type for
specifying data types for each column and
this parameter is optional.
Without specifying the type,
all types will be casted to
a more general or precise type.
So there will be some inference done.
So, wines equals np.genfromtxt,
we'll take in our CSV file,
we'll set our delimiter to semicolon.
And we're going to skip our header right
now and let's take a look at wines.
All right, so
a whole bunch of data here about wines.
So, recall that we can use integer
indexing to get a certain column or row.
For example, if we wanted to
select the fixed acidity column,
which is the first column, we can do so
by entering the index into the array.
Also remember that for
multi-dimensional arrays,
the first argument refers to the row and
the second argument refers to the column.
And if we just give one argument, then
we'll get a single dimensional list back.
Okay, so all rows are combined, but
only the first column from them.
That will be print integer 0 for
slicing, so,
wines sub colon,
that means we want all rows, right.
We haven't given any numbers
to that parameter, comma 0,
we just want to get the first columns.
But if we want to get the same values, but
we wanted to preserve that
they sit in their own rows,
we can actually write wines colon and
then the second is 0 : 1.
So, take a look at these two statements
for a moment before we run them.
In the first one,
we say we want one column, the 0th column.
In the second statement,
we say we want all the columns
between index 0 and 1.
Which happens to only b in the 0th
column because we never include the end.
But the result that numpy gives us after
we execute that, actually looks different.
All the numbers are the same,
the first one though,
gives us a single list of numbers.
And the second one preserves the general
shape that this is a single column.
So, this is another great example
of how the shape of data is
actually just an abstraction.
Which we can layer intentionally on top
of the data that were working with.
If we want a range of columns in order,
say, column 0 through 3 and
recall this means first second and
third, since we started zero.
And we don't include the training
index value, we could do that too.
So, wines sub colon comma 0 comma 3 and
what if we want several
non-consecutive columns?
Well, we can place the indices of
the columns that we want into an array and
past that array as the second argument.
So here's an example, we can take wines,
we want all rows so, colon.
And then our second argument is actually
a list of the indexes that we're
interested in.
So, we can also do some basic
summarization of this data set.
For example, if we wanted to find
out the average quality of red wine,
we can select the quality column.
We could do this in a couple of ways, but
the most appropriate is to use
the -1 value for the index,
as negative numbers means
slicing from the back of a list.
And then we just call the aggregation
functions on this data.
So, we could say wines,
the first parameter is colon,
the second one is minus one.
Because we just want the last column and
then we'll take the mean.
And just pause this for
a minute and think,
do you understand what the -1 is?
So, if not, you'll want to revisit some
of the basics on Python slicing and
string slicing, all right, so 5.6.
And let's take a look at another dataset,
this time on graduate school admissions.
So it is field such as GRE score,
TOEFL score, university rating and so
forth and
it has a chance of admission at the end.
With this dataset, we can do data
manipulation and basic analysis to infer
what conditions are associated
with higher chances of admission.
So, let's take a look, so
we can specify data field names using
genfromtext as it loads the CSV data.
And also we can have numpy try and infer
this type of the column by setting the d
type parameter to none, as we've seen.
So graduate admission
equals np.genfromtxt,
we reload the data from
dataset/admission-predict.csv.
We'll set the d-type to none, we're going
to set the delimiter here to a comma.
We're going to skip our header and
instead,
we're just going to pass it
the actual names of the column.
So, I'm going to write them here, serial
number GRE Score, TOEFL Score Ranking,
SOP, Letters of recommendation GPAs,
Research and the Chance of Admissions.
And let's take a look at what that
graduate admission looks like.
So, notice that the resulting
array is actually
a one-dimensional array
with 400 tuples in it.
So let's look at the shape,
it's actually got 400 tuples and
it's just one dimension.
So, we can retrieve a column from the
array using the columns name, for example.
Let's get the CGPA column and
only the first five values,
so we'll take graduate_admission sub CGPA.
So, this tells us we only want
to get that one column and
then we want to get the first five values,
so 0 : 5.
So, since the GPA in the data
set range from 1 to 10 and
in the US it's more common to use
a scale of 4, a common task might be
to convert the GPA by dividing by 10 and
then multiplying by 4.
So, graduate admission
CGPA is equal to the graduate_admission
sub CGPA divided by 10 times 4.
And let's look at the output
of like 20 values there.
And it's important to keep in mind that
we've actually changed now this data,
right?
So, we actually assigned
graduate admissions sub CGPA,
that changes it on the underlying array.
So we've normalized this to a four-point
scale, remember Boolean masking?
Well, we can use this to find out how many
students have had research experience by
creating a Boolean mask and
passing it to the array indexing operator.
So, we'll take the graduate_admission
sub research will compare that to 1,
if it's one, a True will be admitted,
otherwise a False will be admitted.
That creates us a mask,
which we then pass into graduate
admission using the indexing operator.
So, that will now just emit
certain values that are true and
it will not admit all the false values.
And then we're just going to calculate
the length and so we just, the len of
that array or the length of that,
it's just the same as if it were a list.
So, since we've got the data
field chance of admission,
which ranges from 0 to 1,
we can try and
see if students with high chance of
admission, let's say 80% on average,
have hired GRE scores than those with
lower chance of admission, let's say 40%.
So first we're going to use
Boolean masking to pull out only
those students that we're interested
in based on their chance of admission.
And then we pull out
only their GPA scores and
then we're going to print the mean values.
So let's print the values, so,
we'll take graduate admission sub
chance of admit compared to 0.8.
We're going to broadcast this out,
take the GRE score and look at the mean.
And we're going to do the same thing for
the 0.4.
So, take it a moment here to reflect,
do you understand what's
happening in the calls above?
When we do the Boolean masking,
we are left with an array
with tuples in it still.
And numpy holds underneath this a list
of the columns we specified and
their name and indexes.
And so, we can do graduate_admission
sub graduate_admission sub chance of
admit greater than 0.8.
In this case, we're taking that
we're creating the Boolean mask and
then we're applying it to
the graduate admission data and
we see that the output is
actually still in tuples.
Because there's many different
columns being kept here.
And this I think is a little
bit more clear in Pandas,
which we'll talk about
later in this course.
So, let's also do this with GPA.
So, I'm just going to copy and
paste the above, but
I'm going to change the values to GPA.
Well, I guess one could have expected
this, the GPA and the GRE for
students who have a higher
chance of being admitted,
at least based on our cursory
look here seem to be higher.
So that's a bit of
a whirlwind tour of numpy,
the core scientific
Computing library in Python.
Now, you're going to see a lot more
of this kind of discussion using this
library.
And we'll be focusing on this
in this course on Pandas,
which is actually built on top of numpy.
Don't worry if this didn't all
make sense the first time through,
we're going to dig in a lot more over
the next couple of weeks with pandas.
But it's useful and
the point of this lecture is so
that you know that underneath,
numpy is used as a library.
And the capabilities of numpy
are available to you within Pandas as
we go forward.